---
id: 111
title: Poetry
comments: true
author: Dan Elton
layout: post
permalink: /2008/01/01/my-poetry.htm
categories:
  - poetry
tags:
  - poetry
---
<b>by Dan Elton</b><br>

<br>

<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">
<b>Words the mathematician spoke at the end of the world</b><br>
Did you see, did you see??<br>
the dying moths, the symmetry?<br>
<br>
The fearful broken glass array,<br>
scattered along the cracked road,<br>
like a drunken musician, it composed<br>
a random matrix of doubtful glances,<br>
a tensor of silly stagnant dances,<br>
an algebra of smashed dismay.<br>
<br>
The fire came down,<br>
the wind went around,<br>
the fire was hot,<br>
the wind was cold,<br>
And somewhere, somehow,<br>
I lost my hat!<br>
<br>
<br>
<b>Listening to Chopin at 2am</b><br>
If I could explain how I felt right now,<br>
our souls would have merged into one,<br>
and I would not be sitting here,<br>
looking out the window.<br>
<br>
Halogen street lamps are a cold blue,<br>
but colder still was my heart today.<br>
<br>
As the photons pierce my retina<br>
they remind me how<br>
your glances pierced my heart.<br>
<br>
These lights transfix me:<br>
pink, orange, red, and green,<br>
softly they glow in the distance,<br>
as headlights drift between.<br>
<br>
do they twinkle, or is that my imagination? <br>
I no longer know or care,<br>
With no desire to keep track of reality,<br>
I fall into a blank stare. <br>
<br>
Notes fly like atoms drifting in empty space, sometimes <br>
colliding into chords, other times spinning around each other<br>
in a complicated dance of mathematical precision. <br>
<br>
Transfixed, I am spinning and moving with them<br>
now and then catching upon a melody line <br>
at other times getting struck by large chords<br>
which suddenly appear out of nowhere.<br>
<br>
Now time itself has <br>
quit behaving <br>
correctly<br>
perhaps a drunken frat boy <br>
is playing <br>
with <br>
Newton's metronome.<br>
<br>
It is strange how the notes trickle<br>
but do not splash<br>
I am not sure whether <br>
they are moving, or I.<br>
<br>
With ease I violate the conservation of energy;<br>
I always thought it was a rather silly idea anyways.<br>
<br>
I am tired of searching for something<br>
and then pretending to find it, when really,<br>
it never existed to begin with. <br>
<br>
I should mention the colors...<br>
somewhere a mad physicist is playing with his lasers,<br>
and the pure tones look very pretty.<br>
But now the modes are going out of phase and some<br>
higher order terms have come back from the dead.<br>
It's more chromatic than a scherzo by Schoenberg<br>
played by John Cage on a piano that has been smashed <br>
with beer bottles and dragged through the slums of Warsaw.<br>
<br>
In endless error I am hurled...<br>
my anchor line broken, my compass cracked,<br>
and probably demagnetized as well,<br>
adrift without a paddle,<br>
I feel I will be blown haphazardly across the universe,<br>
forever.<br>
<br>
<b><br>
Poor Poem<br>
</b>Gentle reader:<br>
the rhymes here are pretty lame<br>
the language quite inane.<br>
I have tried to make it rhyme<br>
in measure and proper time<br>
but I have to admit,<br>
stuff doesn't always fit.<br>
I don't have much good to say<br>
and I bid you go your way,<br>
lest you waste your time<br>
looking for verse sublime.</font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">This is my poor poem, <br>
the existential rant<br>
of a driveling sophocant<br>
explaining his days and ways.</font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">Late hours, memories lay in dusty
corridors.<br>
I drift slowly through tedious neurotic algebras,<br>
and the ravages of deep thought make me weary.<br>
I adopt a pastoral mood.<br>
<br>
Dancing among butterflies and flowers divine,<br>
under the silver apple of the moon.<br>
A Chopin nocturne drifts amongst the night air.</font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">My mind lingers and then malingers<br>
I feel as though it floats.<br>
Time flows without end.<br>
I fly amongst the cleansing winds.<br>
But just as time marches&nbsp; <br>
so the beat of my heart<br>
brings me back to earth.<br>
&nbsp;</font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal; text-autospace: none; margin-bottom: .0001pt">
<font face="Roman"><b>darkness<br>
</b>the void is dark.<br>
my dreams are<br>
stretched before me <br>
like an event horizon.<br>
do I dare?<br>
do I dare?<br>
do I dare go down that path?<br>
<br>
The path I've been down before,<br>
and back again, only to turn around? <br>
I know its meanderings, its dead ends,<br>
they only lead to madness!&nbsp;<br>
Perhaps once more, I will go,<br>
to account and recount my loss.&nbsp;<br>
I will try to build something <br>
out of the nothingness that remains. <br>
A shelter perhaps.<br>
But from what? <br>
A shelter from myself.<br>
A shelter from the pain.<br>
Do you remember the fresh spring rains?<br>
and the bright summer sun?<br>
Do you remember the autumn leaves?<br>
and the somber snows of winter?<br>
I know these things through you.<br>
Spring was a romance,<br>
summer a comedy,<br>
fall was a satire,<br>
and winter a tragedy.<br>
I know these things through you.<br>
<br>
<b><br>
Tangerine dream <br>
</b>the smell of the eternal feminine lingers<b> </b>in the
cold dry air.<br>
<br>
the air vibrates<br>
as static sweeps through it.<br>
<br>
hisssyyyhissyyyhisssssssssssss<br>
<br>
In the air dust
floats<br>
with chaotic motions.<br>
<br>
beyond the known,<br>
beyond the knowable, <br>
beyond the self. <br>
<br>
glimmer<br>
pop!<br>
glow<br>
<br>
LED! <br>
laser! <br>
cathode ray!<br>
<br>
Full of obsession,<br>
in a circle of confusion:<br>
orange fuzzballs,<br>
scarlet circles,<br>
a somber green dot,<br>
bursts of laser light.<br>
<br>
Dead metal,<br>
broken machines,<br>
smashed concrete dust,<br>
a vibrating transformer.<br>
<br>
Borken borken, in the case!<br>
a
sicky sticky slobby beat-- <br>
a honey diffracting metal sheet,<br>
with a slow glow flow pace. <br>
<br>
break the night,<br>
break the day,<br>
break the broken dream away.<br>
<br>
Caught in the trance<br>
of a laser light dance,<br>
I will follow my desires<br>
through cold electric fires.<br>
<br>
<b>Geometrical Poem 1</b></font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">no things know nothing nothing know
things no<br>
things know nothing no no nothing know things<br>
know nothing no things things no nothing know<br>
nothing no things know know things no nothing<br>
nothing know no things things no know nothing<br>
things nothing know no no know nothing things<br>
no things nothing know know nothing things no<br>
know no things nothing nothing things no know<br>
<br>
<b><br>
0 and 1</b></font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">There is a universe between 0 and 1<br>
I tried to look for myself there:<br>
caught between nothingness and being. </font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">When I looked at zero I saw nothing<br>
but it was indeed something.</font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">When I looked at one I saw something
<br>
but it was indeed nothing.</font></p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><font face="Roman">And being and nothingness were one.
<br>
&nbsp;</font></p>
<p align="center"><font size="2" color="#C0C0C0"> <br> © 2008 Dan Elton </font></p>
<p align="center">&nbsp;</p>
