---
id: 2025
title: Book list
comments: true
date: 2010-05-01T23:22:00+00:00
author: delton137
layout: post
permalink: /2010/05/01/book-list/
categories:
  - books
tags:
  - books
---

(lightly edited for grammar in 2024) <br>

<font size="6"><b>Books I read in 1999 - 2005</b></font><br>

<font size="3">The following is from a small notebook I kept between around 8th 
and 11th grade.&nbsp; Notes in parenthesis are original notes, written roughly 
around the time when the book was read.&nbsp; It's either a lot or not that many 
depending how you look at it.</font><br>

<b><font size="5">1999 - 2000 (6th - 7th grade)</font></b><br>
<b><i>20,000 Leauges Under the Sea </i></b>by Jules Verne ****<br>
<b><i>Journey to the Center of the Earth </i></b>by Jules Verne ***** </b>(My&nbsp; fav. 
book. Very Exciting!)<br>
<b><i>The Chronicles of Narnia </i>by C.S. Lewis ***** </b>(I read 6/7 books. <i>
Voyage of the Dawn Trader </i>was my fav.)<br>
<b><i>The Hobbit </i>by J.R.R Tolkien </b>(400pgs) *****<br>
<b><i>Lord of the Rings Trilogy </i>by J.R.R. Tolkien </b>****<br>
<b><i>Fantastic Voyage </i>by Isaac Asimov</b> (250pgs) ***** (Very good - 
obeying the laws of physics, men travel into the human body. Made into a movie)
<br>
<i><b>Fantastic Voyage II</b></i>&nbsp <b>by Isaac Asimov </b>(250pgs) *** 
(Didn't live up to FV1. Men travel into the brain.)<br>
<b><i>Foundation </i>by Isaac Asimov </b>(250pgs) ***** (Science fiction 
classic. Very slow moving) (read 2-3 times)<br>
<b><i>Second Foundation </i>by Issac Asimov </b>(250pgs) ***<br>
<b><i>Robots &amp; Empire </i>by Isaac Asimov </b>(250pgs) * (didn't finish)<br>
<b><i>Oliver Twist </i>by Charles Dickens *** </b>(boring; but worth reading to 
increase vocab., etc)<br>
<b><i>The Hunt for Red October </i>by Tom Clancy </b>***** (very good suspense 
novel! Slow moving plot, but always interesting story about rebel Soviet 
submarine commander headed for Cuba in an old sub)<br>
<b><i>White Fang </i>by Jack London *** </b>(About a maltreated dog/wolf)<br>
<b><i>Call of the Wild </i>by Jack London *****<br>
<i>The Andromeda Strain</i> by Michael Crichton ******<br>
<i>Sphere</i> by Michael Crichton ****<br>
<i>The Prince and the Pauper </i>by Mark Twain ****<br>
<i>A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court </i>by Mark Twain </b>(my 
favorite Twain book....)<br>
<b><i>The Hound of the Baskervilles </i>by Sherlock Holmes </b>(my fav. 
Holmes..beause of length, suspense, and scary parts)<b><br>
<i>A Wrinkle in Time</i> by Madeleine L'Engle </b>(English class)<br>
<b><i>Down River</i> by John Hart </b>(English class)<b><br>
<i>In my Father's House&nbsp; </i>by Ann Rinaldi </b>(English class)<br>
<b><i>Romeo &amp; Juliet</i> by William Shakespeare </b>(English class)<b><br>
<i>The Giver </i>by Lois Lowry<i>** </i></b><i>&nbsp;</i>(English class) 
(Fantasy, about society without pain or emotions)<b><br>
<i>To Kill a Mockingbird </i>by Harper Lee *****<br>
</b>
<b><font size="5">Summer of 2000 </font> <br>
(from a reading report I submitted. I wrote brief plot summaries of each for 
credit.)<br>
<i>Seven Summits </i>by Dick Bass &amp; Frank Wells </b>(336pgs) ****<br>
<b><i>Lord Brocktree </i>by Brain Jacques </b>(416pgs) **** (Redwall series)<br>
<b><i>Salamdanstron </i>by Brian Jacques </b>(391pgs) ***** (Redwall series)<br>
<b><i>All Creatures Great and Small </i>by James Herriot <br>
<i>Missionary Stories with the Millers </i>by Mildred A. Marten </b>(208pgs) 
****<br>
<b><i>Wake Island Pilot </i>by Brig. Gen. Jhon F. Kinney </b>(181 pgs) ****<br>
<b><i>Smokey the Cowhorse </i>by Will James </b>(310pgs) *****<br>
<b><i>The Ark of Noah </i>&nbsp;</b>(194 pgs) *** (didn't read entirely) <br>
<b><i>Mossflower </i>by Brian Jacques </b>(425pgs) ****** (Redwall series) <br>
<b><i>A Study in Scarlet &amp; Adventures of Sherlock Holmes</i> by Sir Arthur Conan 
Doyle </b>*****<br>
<br>
<b><font size="5">2002-2003&nbsp; (8th - 10th grade)</font> </b>(notes in parenthesis were written at that time) <b><br>
<i>The Valley of Fear </i>by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle</b> (200pgs) ***** (very 
good, suprising end)<br>
<b><i>High Adventure </i>by Sir Edmund Hillary </b>**** (first hand account of 
1st Everest Summit)<br>
<b><i>The Portrait of Dorian Grey </i>by Oscar Wilde * </b>(slow, quaint, boring 
predictable ending. French lit)<br>
<b><i>The Sword in the Stone </i>by T.H. White </b>****<br>
<b><i>Prey </i>by Michael Crichton<br>
<i>Jupiter </i>by Ben Bova<br>
<i>Star Trek: The Abode of Life<br>
Foundation and Empire </i>by Isaac Asimov<br>
<i>2nd Foundation </i>by Isaac Asimov<br>
<i>Earthlight </i>by Arthur C. Clarke<br>
<i>The Terminal Man </i>by Michael Crichton <br>
<i>Tuck Everlasting </i>by Natali Babbet<br>
<i>Around the World in 80 Days </i>by Jules Verne<br>
<i>Star Trek: Unification <br>
A Brief History of Time </i>by Stephen Hawking<br>
<i>Kidnapped! </i>by Robert Lewis Stephenson *****<br>
<i>Murder on the Orient Express </i>by Agatha Christie </b>****<br>
<b><i>Sink the Bismark! </i>&nbsp;by E.M. Forester <br>
<i>The Three Musketeers </i>by Alexandre Dumas </b>(was so long that by the time 
I got to pg. 400 I switched to the condensed version and finished it up in 25 
pages, instead of an additional 250)<b><br>
<i>I, Robot </i>by Isaac Asimov<br>
<font size="5"><b>2004 (10th - 11th grade)</b></font>
<i><b>The Time Machine </i>by H.G. Wells <br>
<i>The DeVinci Code </i>by Dan Brown<br>
<i>Jane Eyre </i>by Charlotte Bronte </b>(HS English)<b><br>
<i>A Farewell to Arms </i>by Earnest Hemmingway </b>(boring)<br>
<b><i>1984 </i>by George Orwell </b>(HS English)<b><br>
<i>Animal Farm </i>by George Orwell<br>
<i>The Adventures of Huck Finn </i>by Mark Twain </b>(HS English)<b><br>
<i>Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglas </i>by Frederick Douglas </b>****<b><br>
<i>Of Mice and Men </i>by Steinbeck&nbsp; </b>(HS English)<b><br>
<i>The Color of Water </i>by James McBride </b>(HS English)<b><br>
<i>Ender's Game</i> by Orson Scott Card </b>(Sci-Fi classic! *****)<br>
<b><i>Star Trek: Log 1 </i>by James Blish <br>
<i>Tooth &amp; Nail </i></b>(SAT Prep Book)<br>
<br>
<b><font size="5">2005 (11th-12th grade)</font><br>
<i>The Scarlet Letter </i>by Nathanial Hawthorne
</b>(HS English)<b><br>
<i>Brave New World </i>by A. Huxley<br>
<i>The Turn of the Screw</i>&nbsp;by Henry James
</b>***<b><br>
<i>The Time Hoppers </i>by Robert Silverberg
</b>*****<br>
<b><i>Digital Fortress </i>by Dan Brown </b>*****<br>
<b><i>Neuromancer </i>by William Gibson<br>
<i>The Physics of Star Trek </i>by Lawrence M. Krauss</b></p>
<p align="left"><b><font size="6">Books I Read in 2006 </font><font size="4"><br>
<i>The Things They Carried</i> </font> </b><font size="4">by Tim O'Brian<b> </b>
(HS English)<br>
<b><i>Ella Minnow Pea</i> </b>by Mark Dunn (HS English)<b><br>
<i>The Mysterious Island</i> </b>by Jules Verne <b><br>
<i>The Caves of Steel</i> </b>by Issac Asimov <br>
<i>
<b>Pebble in the Sky </b></i>by Issac Asimov<b><br>
<i>A Confederacy of Dunces</i> </b>by James Kennedy Toole<b><br>
<i>A Canticle for Leibowitz</i> </b>by Walter M. Miller, Jr<br>
</font>
<b><font size="5"><br>
</font><font size="6">Books I Read in 2007</font><font size="4"><br>
<i>Dr. Crypton &amp; His Problems</i> </font> </b><font size="4">by Dr. Crypton<b><br>
<i>Contact</i> </b>by Carl Sagan<b><br>
<i>Lucky Star &amp; the Oceans of Venus</i> </b>by Isaac Asimov<b><br>
</b>
<i>
<b>God and the New Physics </b></i>by Paul Davies<b><br>
<i>Seeing in the Dark </i> </b>by Timothy Ferris <b><br>
<i>The Stranger </i> </b>by Albert Camus <b><br>
<br>
</b></font> <b><font size="6">Books I Read in 2008</font><font size="4"><br>
<i>Feynman's Rainbow </i></font> </b><font size="4">by Leonard Mlodinow <b><br>
<i>The Meaning of it All </i> </b>by Richard Feynman <b>
<br>
<i>The Selfish Gene </i> </b>by Richard Dawkins<b><br>
<i>The Revolution: A Manifesto</i> </b>by Ron Paul<b><br>
<i>What do You Care What Other People Think?</i> </b>by Richard Feynman<br>
<i>
<b>My Brain is Open: the Mathematical Journeys of Paul Erdos </b></i>by Bruce 
Schechter&nbsp; <b><br>
<i>The Great Gatsby</i> </b>by F. Scott Fitzgerald (2nd reading)<b><br>
<i>Flatland : A Romance of Dimensions</i> </b>by Edwin A. Abbot<b><br>
<i>3001: The Final Odyssey</i> </b>by Arthur C. Clarke <b><br>
<i>Lord of the Flies </i> </b>by William Golding<br>
<i>
<b>Rendezvous with Rama</b></i> by Arthur C. Clarke<br>
<i>
<b>Civil Disobedience</b></i> by Henry David Thoreau&nbsp; <br>
<i>
<b>Learn Faster and Remember More </b></i>by Allen Bragdon and David Gamon<br>
<i>
<b>Mostly Harmless </b></i>by Douglas Adams<b><br>
<i>The Communist Manifesto </i> </b>(pamphlet) by Karl Mark and Frederich Engels <b><br>
<i>Nausea</i> </b>by Jean Paul Sarte<br>
</font><b><font size="5"><br>
</font><font size="6">Books I Read in 2009</font><font size="4"><br>
<i>The End of Faith </i></font>
</b><font size="4">by Sam Harris<br>
<i>
<b>Tao te Ching </b></i>by Lao-tzu<br>
<b><i>QED : The Strange Theory of Light and Matter</i> </b>by Richard Feynman<br>
<b>
<span style="font-style: italic">Snow Crash</span><span style="font-style: normal"> </span> </b>
<span style="font-style: normal">by Neil Stephenson<br>
</span>
<b>
<span style="font-style: italic">Wuthering Heights</span><span style="font-style: normal"> </span> </b>
<span style="font-style: normal">by Emily Bronte<br>
</span>
<b>
<span style="font-style: italic">Fahrenheit 451</span><span style="font-style: normal"> </span> </b>
<span style="font-style: normal">by Ray Bradbury<br>
</span><i><b>Breakfast of Champions</b></i> by Kurt Vonnegut<br>
<i><b>Cat's Cradle </b></i>by Kurt Vonnegut</font><i><b><font size="4"><br>
The Singularity is Near</font></b></i><font size="4"> by Ray Kurzweil<br>
<i><b>Stranger in a Strange Land </b></i>by Robert A. Heinlein</font></p>
<p align="left" dir="rtl"><b><font size="6">Books I Read in Spring 2010</font></b><font size="4"><br>
<i><b>The Trouble With Physics </b></i>by Lee Smolin<br>
</font><font size="3">-- This book was a bit long-winded, but was pretty 
interesting. It touched on the history and some of the basic postulates of 
string theory. The overview of modern physics was pretty mediocre and 
uninspired. The history of string theory was long winded and not very memorable. 
The impression one gets is the field has been plagued by extremely difficult 
(and dull) calculations. The the most interesting part of this book was the last 
quarter, which discussed the culture of science and the way string theory now 
dominates fundamental research. He also discusses how revolutionary thinking is 
not encouraged by the establishment and makes some suggestions as to new directions. 
Sean Carroll's review of the book reflects my overall opinion about the book. He 
sharply criticized the book's treatment of string theory but praised the social 
analysis. He lamented that the public would probably miss the point of the 
social analysis but be misled by the harsh criticisms of string theory. <br>
</font><font size="4"><br>
<i><b>Neuromancer</b></i> by William Gibson (2nd reading)<br>

[See my review](https://www.moreisdifferent.com/2010/03/01/neuromancer/)

<font size="4"><br>
<i><b>Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? </b></i>by Phillip K. Dick<br>
</font><font size="3">-- I found this to be a very worthwhile read. It explains 
some aspects of <i>Blade Runner </i>that are not apparent -- for instance why 
there are artificial animals (most real animals died due to nuclear 
contamination). The book spends quite a bit of time on the notion of artificial 
animals and uses them in an allegorical fashion. It differs largely from the 
movie in its tone which is satirical and not &quot;neo-noir&quot;. The plot also diverges somewhat towards the second half. Overall it 
is an enjoyable quick read. <br>
</font><font size="4"><br>
<i><b>The Emperor's New Mind</b></i> by Roger Penrose<br>
</font><font size="3">--In my opinion this is one of the best popular science 
books on the market. I sort of glossed over some of the quantum material but 
otherwise it was very engrossing.<br>
<br>
</font><font size="4"><b><i>Musicophilia </i></b>by Oliver Sacks<br>
<br>
<b><i>The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat </i></b>by Oliver Sacks<br>
<br>
<i><b>Give me a Break</b></i> by John Stossel<br>
</font><font size="3">--This book is quite biased and from I've heard has some 
factual errors. I honestly don't remember much about it other than that it was 
somewhat sensational and very engrossing. John Stossel certainly is a maverick 
and one of the only true libertarians in the mainstream media. He talks about 
how he changed from a critic of corporations to a critic of government. He makes 
some good points and gives a lot of specific cases that he has encountered 
during his journalistic investigations.&nbsp; It is perhaps reading for the 
interesting cases which show how government policies can have many unexpected 
effects contrary to their intention. He argues against institutions such as 
gov't education, the FDA and EPA, arguing that the free-market and tort system 
can do a better job. However, since he bases his arguments only on specific 
cases he encountered, they remain weak. His discussion of the need for tort 
(lawsuit) reform is interesting, in particular his comparison with the European 
system, where plaintiff pays the defendant's legal fees</font> if they loose. <font size="4">
<br>
<br>
<i><b>Count Zero</b></i> by William Gibson<br>
<br>
<i><b>Atlas Shrugged</b></i> by Ayn Rand<br>
</font><font size="3">--When I have time I will write a long review on this. As 
you probably know, its a very long novel. (longer than <i>War and Peace</i>) 
I've read that die-hard fans recommend breaking it into sections. That is a good 
idea because she repeats her basic philosophical points many times and the 
long-winded monologs can get kind of tiresome. That is basically what I ended up 
doing since since I stopped reading about 400 pages in in 2008,&nbsp; then 
almost 2 years later I picked it up and read the remaining 690 pages. Some parts 
I really loved and some parts I found rather tedious. Overall I enjoyed it.
</font><font size="4"><br>
<br>
<i><b>Siddhartha </b></i>by Hermann Hesse<br>
<br>
<b><i>The Petite Prince</i></b> by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry<i><b><br>
<br>
Steppenwolf </b></i>by Hermann Hesse<br>
</font><font size="3">--This is a really interesting book. It starts out as a 
depressing existential novel but twists into a more hedonistic form, finally 
resolving itself in the most bizarre way. Hard to explain in brief. According to 
Wikipedia it borrows some ideas from Eastern philosophy. </font></p>
<p dir="ltr"> <font size="4"> 
<b><i>Oppenheimer: Portrait of an Enigma </i></b>by Jeremy Bernstein<br>
</font><font size="3">
--</font>This is a nice enjoyable biography that has the merit of being 
relatively short ~220pgs. I won't delve into the story, but he had a fairly 
interesting life.
<i> <font size="4"> 
<b><br>
<br>
Mona Lisa Overdrive </b>
</font></i> <font size="4"> 
by William Gibson<i><br>
</i>
</font><font size="3">
--</font>I felt Mona Lisa Overdrive was substantially better than <i>Count Zero.
</i>It had an engaging plot, a ton of interesting characters and a lot of 
jaw-dropping action. I mean, the entire plot interweaved between 4 frames of 
reference, climaxing in a long complex denouement, set amongst a ruined 
industrial complex. And it involved computer hackers, robots, and a young female 
protagonist. A great combination no doubt. His prose remains &quot;finely polished&quot; 
-- &quot;gleaming&quot; one might say. He continues to explore some of the themes in <i>
Neuromancer, </i>most notably &quot;sim-stim&quot; (simulated stimulation, ie. virtual 
reality, (what people watch instead of TV)) and bodily modification. (btw,
<a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2fp8mYC5abE">here</a>'s a song by Juno 
Reactor called &quot;Mona Lisa Overdrive&quot; that was used in the Matrix.)<b><br>
<i><font size="4">
<br>
The Brain: the Final Frontier </font></i> </b><font size="4">by Richard M. Restak<br>
<br>
<b><i>Albert Einstein: His Life and Universe </i></b>by Walter Isaacson<br>
</font><font size="3">--This was a really enjoyable read. I highly recommend 
this for anyone curious about Einstein. It provides the entire picture, giving 
his human side, his philosophic side, his political side and his scientific side 
without watering down the philosophy or the science. Even though Isaacson is a 
journalist, he presents excellent descriptions of the science -- he really did a 
lot of research for this book and consulted with a lot of physicists.&nbsp; 
Isaacson is very careful to avoid the biases of earlier biographies. He presents 
Einstein's strengths 
without patronizing and his weaknesses without being overly cynical or 
disingenuous. He seeks to explain some of the contradictions in his life, such 
as why 
he failed to get a professorship but ended up doing revolutionary physics, and 
why he preferred to work alone but at the same time embraced his role as a world famous pop-icon. 
And finally, the question of why he was revolutionary in his youth but 
reactionary in old age. 
Overall, it is a very loving and balanced treatment of his life. Highly 
recommended. <br>
</font><font size="4"><br>
<b><i>God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater </i></b>by Kurt Vonnegut<b><br>
</b></font><font size="3">--This is another great book by Vonnegut. In his 
self-appraisal Vonnegut ranked it third after <i>Cat's Cradle </i>and <i>
Slaughterhouse Five </i>and I tend to agree.&nbsp; Here he deals with the issues of 
American greed and &quot;what to do about the poor&quot; using his black satire. Great fun. 
(8/31/10)</font><b><font size="4"><br>
<i><br>
Virtual Light </i>
</font></b><font size="4">
by William Gibson<b><i><br>
</i></b>
</font><font size="3">
--<i>Virtual Light</i> is a &quot;cracking good yarn&quot;. <i>People</i> 
magazine called it &quot;both exhilarating and terrifying&quot;. That was exactly how I 
felt while I was reading it, and I feel that apt description Gibson's books in 
general.&nbsp; His prose has evolved slightly as well, one might say it has 
softened a bit.. it seemed to flow easier than the Sprawl trilogy, although part 
of that may be that I'm getting more acquainted his writing style. The 
characters were interesting and he kept the plot moving along nicely. The best 
thing about this book though was the sociological phenomena he investigates 
through the narrative. I mean, this is a thinking-person's book. This is not , 
as some would blow it off to be, another techno-thriller ala late Michael 
Crichton. No, beneath the glam, hyperbole and action sequences there are some 
real issues Gibson is exploring.&nbsp; And as if it wasn't already obvious 
Gibson wanted to study sociological phenomena in this book, one of the 
characters is actually a Japanese sociologist
</font>visiting California to see &quot;The Bridge&quot;. The Bridge is a fixture in this 
book and the two that GIbson wrote next -- the three together are known as &quot;The 
Bridge Trilogy&quot;. At first, I was incredulous about the entire concept. But once 
it was explained I found myself fascinated. In brief, the idea is that after a 
mega-earthquake, a the San Francisco-Oakland bridge is shut down and left in 
disrepair. Eventually, masses of derelicts break through the barb-wire and take 
over the bridge, turning into a massive living space. Crudely speaking, you 
could call it a &quot;shanty town&quot;, but it's actually a lot more. Gibson introduces 
the obscure Japanese notion of a &quot;Thomasson&quot; (an actual term) to describe 
monuments that serve no purpose but as sociological artifacts. He discusses 
street life amongst message couriers, a real inner-city subculture that he 
researched. The female protagonist, Chevette, is a courier and seems to be a 
type for the girl in <i>Snow Crash. </i>There are some interesting looks at 
religion and the government as well. Finally, I've noticed a technique Gibson 
uses to make his characters seem believable -- he analyzes thing at their 
intelligence level -- sometimes with humorous results. To give too examples, the 
male protagonist (Rydell) is looking at an old calendar of a man riding a horse. 
Below it it says &quot;Courrier and Ives&quot;, and he wonders which one is the horse. 
Another example is when Chevette thinks Billy Holliday must be a guy. Finally, 
to compare this with the Sprawl trilogy, I would say it is quite similar, but 
his vision of the future has been updated. It is safe to say that Gibson became 
more interested in analyzing contemporary society in his books--to the extent 
that his latest books are not science fiction at all. (this is partly due, no 
doubt, to the actual realization of Gibson's world).&nbsp; Still, compared to 
Neuromancer, there are no far-flung space platforms, consol cowboys, or God-like 
AI. Instead, there is virtual reality, l33t hackers and a lot of teeming, 
disease-riddled masses. (Some themes he continues to explore are drug use and 
mercenary police, in this case private security forces vs. government police). 
Overall, it was a great read and quite thought provoking. I feel like I've begun 
to look at society differently as well. (its a subtle change in worldview, 
kindof scary.. people desperate to &quot;belong&quot; to some social group... hence social 
movements emerge chaotically.. certain people/institutions manipulate technology 
to control the masses.)<b> </b>(9/8/10)<font size="4"><b><br>
<br>
</b>
</font>
<b><font size="6">
Books I'm reading:</font><font size="4"><br>
</font></b><font size="4">
<b>
<i>The Road to Serfdom </i></b></font><font size="4">
by F.A. Hayek<b><br>
<i>Consciousness Explained </i></b>by Daniel Dennett</font><font size="3">
</font><font size="4">
<br>
</font><font size="3">
--Daniel Dennett begins this book by explaining how he got hooked on the 
mind-body problem in college. Now 35 years later, he claims he's made progress 
and it's certainly true. I was soon blown away in the first chapter when he <i>
explained</i> dreams. He offered a reasonable explanation based on simple facts 
about the brain. I won't go into it here, but it can be explained quite simply 
in a few minutes. It basically involves a &quot;guessing&quot; game going on where the 
brain is guessing what random electrical fluctuations are in the brain.</font>
<font size="4"><br>
<b><i>Tender is the Night </i></b>by F. Scott Fitzgerald<br>
<b><i>Moby-Dick </i></b>by Hermann Melville<br>
<br>
</font>
<span style="font-style: normal">
<font size="6">Books I started reading but haven't finished:</font><br>
</span> 
<i><font size="4"><b>Godel, Escher, Bach </b></font></i>
  <span style="font-style: normal">by Douglas Hofstadter <br>
  </span>
  <font size="4"> <b>
  <i>The Bible</i> </b><span style="font-style: normal">by Saint Paul et al. <br>
  </span>
<b><i>Alice in Wonderland</i><span style="font-style: normal"> </span> </b><span style="font-style: normal">by Lewis Carol (?)<br>
  </span>
<b><i>The God Delusion</i> </b><span style="font-style: normal">by Richard Dawkins<br>
  </span>
<b><i>The Case for Mars</i> </b><span style="font-style: normal">by Zubrin
<b> <br>
</b>
  </span>
<b> <i>How to Stop Worrying and Start Living</i><span style="font-style: italic"> </span> </b><span style="font-style: normal">by Dale Carnegie <br>
  </span>
<b>
<i>Thus Spoke Zarathustra</i><span style="font-style: normal">  </span> </b>
<span style="font-style: normal"> by Fredrick Nietzsche (still need to read part III)</span></font><font size="4"><span style="font-style: normal"><br>
  </span></font>
<b><span style="font-style: normal">
  <font size="4">
<br>

<span style="font-style: normal">
  <font size="6">Books I want to read:</font><font size="4"><br></font> 
  </span> 

</font></span></b><font size="4"><i><b>Tess of the d'Urbervilles </b>
</i><span style="font-style: normal">by Thomas Hardy</span><b><br>
  <i>The Brothers Karamazorov </i> </b><span style="font-style: normal">by F.D.<br>
  </span><span style="font-weight: 700"><i>The Metamorphosis</i> </span>
  <span style="font-style: normal">by Franz Kafka</span><b><br>
  <i>Prid</i></b></font><b><font size="4"><i>e and Prejudice</i>
  </font></b><font size="4"><span style="font-style: normal">by Jane Austen</span><b><br>
  <i>A History of Wes</i></b></font><b><font size="4"><i>tern Philosophy</i><span style="font-style: normal">
  </span>
  </font></b><span style="font-style: normal"><font size="4">by Bertrand 
  Russell </font></span><b><font size="4"><br>
  </font></b><font size="4"><b><i>The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night - Time</i><span style="font-style: normal"> </span> </b><span style="font-style: normal">by Mark Haddon (?)<br>
  </span>
  <b><i>Anna Karenna</i><span style="font-style: normal"> </span> </b>
  <span style="font-style: normal">by Leo Tolstoy<b> </b><br></span></font>
  <b><i>Fountains of Paradise</i> </b>
  <span style="font-style: normal">by Arthur C. Clarke<br>
  </span><i><b>A Fire Upon the Deep</b></i><span style="font-style: normal"> by Victor Vinge 
  </span><span style="font-style: normal"><b><br>
Something by Haru Murakami <br>
</b></span><b><font size="4">The Diamond Age<span style="font-style: normal"> 
(and other books) </span>
  </font> </b><span style="font-style: normal"><font size="4">by 
  Neil Stephenson<br>
</font><b><font size="4">Nietzsche :</font></b><font size="4">.&nbsp; 
  various<br>
</font></span><b><font size="4">Science : a Candle in 
  a Demon-Haunted World<span style="font-style: normal"> </span></font> </b><span style="font-style: normal">
  <font size="4">by Carl Sagan<br>
</font></span><b><font size="4">Walden<span style="font-style: normal"> </span>
  </font> </b><span style="font-style: normal"><font size="4">by H.D. 
  Thoreau <br>
</font> </span><b><font size="4">The Art of Intrusion </font>
  </b><span style="font-style: normal"><font size="4">by Kevin Mitnick</font></span></p>



<span style="font-style: normal">
<font size="6"><b>Books I  stopped reading...</b></font><br>
</span> 
<font size="4"><b><i>
  Gravity's Rainbow </i></b>by Thomas Pynchon <br>
  </font> Thomas Pynchon is AMAZING. I mean, the name alone is freakin awesome. 
  This is the seminal work in postmodernism. Now only if I had time to read it!
  <br>
  <b> The Fountainhead </b>
  <span style="font-style: normal">by Ayn Rand</span><b><span style="font-style: normal"><br>
  </span> </b><b><font size="4">The Virtue of Selfishness<span style="font-style: normal"> </span>
  </font>
  </b><font size="4"><span style="font-style: normal">by Ayn Rand<b><br>
  </b></span>
<b><i>The Story of Philosophy</i> </b><span style="font-style: normal">by Will Durant (?) <b><br>
  </b>
  </span> </font><b>
  <font size="4"> Inward Bound </font> </b><font size="4">by Abraham Pais<br>
  <b>Sophie's World</b> by Jostein Gaarder<br>
  </font><b><font size="4">The Problems of Philosophy </font> </b>
  <font size="4"><span style="font-style: normal">
  by Bertrand Russell<br>
  </span> 
<b>The Character of Physical Law</b><span style="font-style: normal"> by Richard 
  Feynman<br>
  </span>
<b>The Nature and Growth of Modern Mathematics </b><span style="font-style: normal">
  by Edna E. Cramer (very long..)</span>
