



Bioism

Ted Kazinsky quote

This piece explores an implicit bias shared by human beings -- the bias towards biology over non-biology, which I dub ‘bioism’.

Humans exhibit many preferences or biases. Biases are not necessarily bad, for instance, the bias for an environment between 70-90F keeps humans alive and thriving. However, biases often conflict rational thinking, leaving to harmful behaviour. You may think bioism cannot possibly be a problem any more than preferences for clean water, adequate food, and other essentials are not considered problematic. A general principle of biases, though, is that it is better to be aware of them.  This is why sociology is an important class -- by recognizing socially constructed biases that favor humans of a particular race, nationality, gender, class, creed, etc, and then confronting their irrationality, we become capable of creating a more inclusive and harmonious society. The first and critical step is realizing the bias exists in the first place.

For any bias, it is possible to construct a case where it becomes problematic. For instance,

The semantics of ‘nature’
Closely linked to bioism is our construal of the word ‘nature’.

The naturalistic fallacy
Biases arrise from two sources - biology and culture. In other words, some are innate, and some are socially constructed.

Innate biases can be supressed, but typically this leads to unintended and bad outcomes.

Current problems with bioism
Bioism underlies several other problems,

The bias is to always think of ‘nature’ as ‘biology’.

A key question is whether bioism is innate or socially constructed. If bioism is innate, then it should be regarded as a human need. The need to be in a biological environment is certaintly not as important as human needs for food, water, companionship, and shelter, but it would exist somewhere on Maslow’s heirarchy of needs. As discussed by Stephen Pinker in his book “The Blank Slate”, the neglect of innate human desires in social planning can lead to disastrous consequences.

This question of the innateness of bioism is very important with respect to space exploration. If bioism is important, then spacecraft should contain a variety of plant species. Life in space colonies would have to be adapted so people spend more time



Bioism appears to be socially constructed.

 than we should accept it as a
