2015-11-28

About me: I grew up in the charming village of Glens Falls, in upstate New York. My immediate ancestors lived primarily in the United States - one line on my father's side can be traced back to colonists who arrived in Plymouth, MA shortly after the Mayflower. I have many warm memories of my childhood -- exploring my hometown, going on vacations with my family, hiking in the Adirondack mountains, and tinkering long hours in the basement. My parents were my chief role models - my mother is a writer, and my father is an analytical chemist and chemical engineer. I am grateful to have been able to start playing with computers and electronics at a young age. I am proud to have been to active in the Boy Scouts and to have obtained the rank of Eagle Scout at the age of 16. During my senior year of high school, I participated in the BOCES New Visions engineering program. Through this program I participated in the Rube Goldberg Machine Contest, where I was part of the winning team.

Upon entering Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, I almost started as an undeclared engineering major, but decided to start as a physics major because I liked the power and generality of physics. I credit Stephen Hawking's book A Brief History of Time as a key influence. My first year at RPI was very challenging because I placed out of the first year of physics courses due to AP credits and my high school math education had not prepared me for the math required for second year physics. Although I struggled with math in the ensuing years, I realized it was an essential tool for understanding the nature of reality and a prerequisite for technological progress. I took additional math courses in complex analysis, linear algebra, and numerical computing, enough to receive a minor in math upon my graduation in 2009. A lot of my spare time during my RPI years was spent doing amateur astronomy. I contemplated astronomy as a career path, but realized I enjoyed it largely as a hobby and means of instilling a passion for science in the public. Nearly every Saturday night I would share the wonders of the universe with the public at the Hirsch Observatory. One of the best parts of my education at RPI was a series of philosophy courses I took, which had a profound impact on me. These courses dealt with exciting and deep issues such as the quantum measurement problem, the mind-body problem, and the nature of space and time. By the time of my graduation, I was very excited by such problems, so graduate studies seemed like the obvious next step. I was not ready to apply to graduate schools, however, so I stayed at RPI for a year as a graduate student. In the summer of 2010, I was fortunate to participate in a summer research program at Los Alamos working on things related to computational neuroscience and computer vision. I developed a strong interest in neuroscience and recognized it as the next great frontier of science. In the fall of 2010, I started graduate school at Stony Brook University.

My first year at Stony Brook was challenging. The core courses at Stony Brook were much more rigorous and challenging than the courses I had taken during my one year of graduate school at RPI. During this time I decided theoretical physics was definitely not for me, for a variety of reasons. Lee Smolin's book The Trouble with Physics helped cement a distaste for String Theory research, which is really more mathematics than physics. In my second year of graduate school I continued to serve as a teaching assistant and explored research opportunities in quantum computing and computational neuroscience. I took a course on quantum computing and a special 1-credit course on computational neuroscience for physicists, which culminated in a talk I gave at the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics. For various reasons, however, my pursuits in these fields did not pan out. In the spring of 2012, I started research with Marivi Fernandez-Serra doing molecular dynamics simulation of liquid water. My adviser gave me an exciting project which asked big questions about the dielectric properties of water. My research has been focused on understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the dielectric constant of water and features in water's dielectric and IR spectra. Although the main goal of my research is to obtain a more complete understanding of water, I have always been interested in the relevance of my work to biophysics and computational drug discovery. In this vein, I have compared the pros and cons of various water models that may be used in biophysical simulation.
